Hi friends in this video let us discuss about dangling
pointers
So a Dangling pointer is a pointer which points to a
memory location which is deleted or freed
That is a pointer which points to a location which
does not exist. Let's see the possible ways were a pointer
acts as a Dangling Pointer. First holding address of out of
scope variables
See this example
Programme
In main function we create an integer pointer ptr
Suppose it is created at address 1024
Now in a block we create integer variable i
and assigned the value 10
It is created at address 2024
Now we have
ptr = &i
So the address of i which is 2024
After the end of the block, the variable i goes
out of scope but ptr still points it's address.
So ptr became a dangling pointer
That is it points to something that is not meaningful
now
During the programme execution some other variables can be placed
on the same memory allocation 2024 which might cause
a problem
So what is the solution to this problem? After using
the pointer make it as null. Thus we can
avoid such issues
Next case is returning address of local variables from the
function. See this example programme
We have the main function and a function get as
we know execution begins from the main function. So main
is pushed into the stack
And here we have int *ptr equal to get
that is we creat an integer pointer and we call
the function get and whatever the function is returning will
be stored in ptr. So control goes to get. Also
it is pushed into the stack
Here we have an integer variable i
created an initialised with 100
Suppose it is created at address 5024
Now we return address of i to the calling
function main. So it will be stored in ptr
But the function get will be popped out from the stack
since its execution is completed. The memory which is
occupied by the function will be available for further use
But the pointer in the main function still points the
memory location 5024
A further function call may occupy the same memory location
which might cause an issue
Let's do some experiment to understand the behaviour
Let's create one more function and call it.
Here the function is a fun and it creates a
local variable named var and assigns the value 250
into it
This local variable may use the memory location
Let's print the value of dangling pointer ptr
It will be printing the value 250
But actually we stored the address of i in ptr
But now we got the value of var
We did the same experiment on different operating systems and
the outputs are in Windows 250, in Mac OS
250, in Lenux
It is segmentation fault core dumped error
This is why we should avoid dangling pointers
We can do it by making the pointer to null
after the use. Next case is
deallocating dynamic memory using free function. See this example
programme
Here the malloc function will allocate eight bytes of
memory and return the base address to the pointer p
Now if we free the Pointer p, the dynamically allocated
memory will be deleted and it becomes available for further
use
But the pointer P will hold the same memory
address. Now
P will act as a dangling pointer. Again
Let's do some experiment on this to understand the behaviour
better
So see this programme we are creating int * p
and using and malloc function we are creating dynamic memory and
storing 1 in p[0] and 2 in p[1]
After that we are freeing the pointer p.
if we again allocate dynamic memory for another pointer q
The same memory location may get allocated to q
Now both p and q
Point to the same memory location
Now we're setting 100 to q[0] and 200 to q[1]
Now if we print the data using pointer p,
it might print the pointer q's data. Here data of Pointer q
which is 100 and 200 will be printed. Again
The solution is we need to set the deallocated
pointer p to null after using it. We did the
same experiment on different operating systems and the outputs were
like this in Windows
We got 100 and 200, In MAC OS
We got 100 200, in linux it was 100 200
So it is important that once the pointer task
is over we need to set to NULL. otherwise
it might cause unexpected behaviour like this
So that's all and thank you for watching this video